The machine sitting in the beautiful, looks like a
two-story living room with Dr. Wayne Hall on June
10. And let's see, say something on your mic and
let's see if it works. Yeah, it's June 10th and
lovely June day outside. The
purpose of these interviews is to try to record for
posterity and anybody else that wants to learn
more about how A&M truly came to be what it is today.
And I remember in the early 60s, your key, key role
Let's go back before A&M. Would you please, so that
any scholar might want to know about your
background, describe your background before you
came to A&M. Okay, Haskell. I saw light of day in
Montana on the boondocks of northwestern Montana
on a cattle wheat ranch where my dad had
homesteaded in the early days. But my mother got
tired of the wilds and wanted the kids to have
better education that was available in our
surroundings in Montana. So she insisted we go
back to Iowa, which was the native state of both
originally. And we did. I grew up on a western Iowa
farm. a poor country kid in a family of thirteen
children. And all of us went through high school
and many through college. I guess we learned our
lessons in the dirt of the Iowa hills. From there I
went to the University of Iowa. When I finished, my
wife and I became married for a short while
together because World War II was beckoning and I
enlisted in the Navy
six months after I received my degree. I served in
the Navy in all the theaters of action. And
although unknown at the time, the landings at the
Omaha beachhead where old Rudder led it with his
rangers, my destroyer squadron escorted them to
the beachhead and gave them the fire support from
the seaward side during the landings. Oh. What was
your destroyer's name? It was the USS Frankfurt,
the 497. At that time, we were part of the Destroyer
Squadron 18, which gave a lot of the fire support
for the landings, not only at Omaha, but at Utah
Beach and the others there. After the war, I went
back to Iowa City, where my wife was living at the
time, and where we had gone to school at the
university, and mulling over what to do, whether
to go back into education or find a job or what. I was
talking with the former head of my department, and
he said, Well, why don't you come back and go to
graduate school? He said, the GI Bill will pay your
way, and I was partly disabled, doing a disabled
veteran thing and got special things.
Essentially got my way paid through graduate
school. Received my Ph.D. in two years there.
Majored in? I majored in biochemistry and
physiology. My thesis was written in plant
physiology because my major professor was a plant
physiologist.
I
took the best job I thought was available at the
time, which was University of Kentucky as
assistant professor of botany.
While there, after two months, the department
chairman came in, whose name was Dr. Herbert
Riley. He said, Hall, I'm going to Oak Ridge. I've
got a scholarship. I want to make you the acting
department chair. I said, what? I was the only
assistant professor in the thing, the new kid on
the block, and here were the others who were full
professors and so forth. But then I found out
shortly the reason, because none of them would
talk to each other, and I was the only one he could
get to take the job. Well, anyway, we ended up and I
got with all the workload of being chairman and
starting a new career as a teacher, researcher. I
had to give up research when I took over the
chairmanship. I got a call from Texas A&M, one of my
former graduate school colleagues had taken a job
at A&M. Now what year was that call? That was in
1948. His name was Dr. Wayne McElrath.
He wanted to know if I was interested in coming to
Texas A&M. They had an assistant professorship
available in their department, which had been
following the reorganization of 1948. I don't
know if you recall, the whole A&M system was
reorganized at that time. In fact, it was brought
in, the first chancellor was appointed, Gib
Gilchrist. And I got to talking with Wayne, both
names, of course, were Wayne. I called him Mac and
said, Mac, sounds interesting. I said, have the
department chairman call me and we'll talk. So he
did, whose name was Dr. Albert Dunlap at that time.
He called, and he finally, after about three
months, convinced me to come to A&M. Kept raising
the salary, which was great in those days, because
salaries were very low. What was your beginning
salary? The beginning salary here was $5,200,
whereas the Kentucky was $4,400. And this was for
12 months. No, originally it was for nine months,
but the promise I'd be made in a 12-month
appointment through the Texas Agriculture
Experiment Station. I was in the College of
Agriculture. And Dr. Lewis, or D. Lewis, did
promise me a 25% appointment in the Experiment
Station, which came the following year. And,
well, that's how I came to A&M. All right. So you
arrived in the fall of 40? 49. It was the summer,
actually. Summer of 49. Describe the campus as you
first saw it. Well, I won't paint it quite as bleak
as I did in this little treatise I did on A&M. But it
was after being used to the lush green grass of
Kentucky, the blue grass area. Literally, it is a
beautiful area. Oh, it's beautiful. When we came
in, it was in August, the middle of August. In those
days, they didn't water the campus, and they'd
been in a prolonged drought for some three years,
and the dust was blowing. It was sort of a
disheartening experience. In fact, I can
remember Dorothy saying, kids got out, we arrived
on the campus, didn't know where to go, so we parked
what looked like sort of a garage area. And the dust
was blowing. And Dorothy said, my gosh, I hope we
wished we had not left Kentucky. And the kids were
hungry and wanted to find something to eat. And I
was trying to find the place where I was to go. And I
hailed what turned out to be an Aggie student in his
uniform, even though it was summertime, but he was
still in uniform. And I said, can you tell me where
the Department of Plant Physiology and Pathology
is located? He said, sure. He said, it's right next
to the building where I work. So he escorted me
across, and I met Dr. Dunlap, and that's where I
started. And where did you all live when you first
Dr. Dunlap agreed when he hired me that he would
find a home for us, a house to rent. We had agreed the
price we were willing to pay, which was small in
those days, and it was over in Bryan. The former,
the mayor of Bryan at that time owned the house. And
Dr. Dunlap knew him. He was a former Aggie. And,
well, one of the lakes up near Hearn is named after
him now, Dansby. Oh. Roland Dansby. Roland,
uh-huh, sure. And he was in a number of businesses.
He had an insurance business. He had a ranch farm.
Oh, I don't know, he had half a dozen things in the
fire at the time. He was very active, and he was a
real southern gentleman. And we lived there, and
of course commuting back and forth and having only
one old beat-up Ford, it became a real problem for
Dorothy to get out to get anything. So finally I
said, why don't we look and see if we can get closer
to the campus? Maybe we can get close enough I can
walk to work, and you can have the car then and do
whatever you want to do. We found a little new
apartment being built on Second Street across
from the Presbyterian Church there. At
Northgate. At Northgate, yeah. It was brand new.
It was very small, but it was new, and it was without
air conditioning. Nothing was air conditioned in
those days, so we got a water cooler, which only
partly worked, and eventually got a window air
conditioner. So I could walk. I actually walked
from Northgate to the campus each morning, or most
mornings anyway. You were in the Department of
Plant? Plant Physiology and Pathology, which had
been formed in 1948. How many were in that
department then, do you remember? Oh, I think
there was ten professors, ranging all the way from
assistant professor to full professor. And the
dean in those days? The dean in those days was Dr.
Shepardson, who was a dairy scientist in
agriculture. And in 1950, I believe it was, no, no,
no, 1954, He was offered a position on the Federal
Reserve Bank in Washington, which he took, which
was a real plum in those days, to be invited from
little podunk college to Washington. And he left,
and
Jimmy Adams, who was the formerly head of agronomy
and soil science, became dean. And it progressed
from there to Adams left, and they invited the
chairman of our department to become dean of
agriculture, Gus Watkins. You probably remember
Gus. Oh yes, yes. The chief academic officer at
that time was called the dean of the college? Yeah,
in those days all of the regular deans of the
schools, and there were just a few colleges
originally. Reported to the dean of the college,
who was the chief academic officer under the
president. And that was whom? Well, it eventually
became John Paul Abbott in about 1950, but
originally it was not. In between John Paul was Dr.
Morgan, who became president.
Let's talk about Dr. Abbott for a moment. Okay.
Characterize him. Oh, I would call him a true
southern gentleman in the best sense of the word.
He was very considerate of people, kindly in his
approach to people. A real Jew, in my opinion. He
may not have been the best or the greatest of the
scholars, but he was a true professor. And the
president when you arrived? The president was Dr.
Bolton, and Gib Gilchrist was the chancellor.
They had just formed the system at that time.
Gilchrist had been president, but he moved to the
chancellorship, and Bolton became the
president. Was he a vigorous leader, Bolton? No,
in fact there's hardly anything that registers on
my mind that I would call it really happened
outstanding. I can't remember hearing anyone
else mention it. He was more or less, I shouldn't
say this but I will, he was more or less fulfilling a
position as far as I was concerned. But in those
days I was so busy with being a professor teaching
and doing research that I cared less about the
higher echelon. What about Gilchrist? Gilchrist
was an able administrator. He was tough as nails
and hard to get along with. And you better hew to his
line or you were on the same wavelength. Did you
faculty members see the president or the
chancellor much? Very seldom.
I didn't meet Dr. Gilchrist or Dr. Bolton to one of
the social affairs. I never met him when I was
interviewed or anything. Do you remember what
your first workloads were, teaching and
research? Well, it sounds rather fantastic in
terms of modern schedules.
I had four sections, laboratory sections of
beginning plant physiology, which I handled
myself with one graduate student who only helped
me in one of them. And I taught two
and three courses besides managing the
laboratories. It was about twenty-two,
twenty-four hours, contact hours. And it was made
clear you were expected to do research in
addition. Oh, yeah. I can never forget when I, I did
meet Dean Shepardson when I first came and
subsequently. In fact, I will never forget when he
called me in to review, they did a faculty
assessment student rating of professors, which
was the first time they'd done it at A&M. He called
me in to review the results, although I'd got a copy
of them myself. I thought they were quite good. I
kind of was cocky in those days, maybe still. I
walked over to get his accolades. I didn't get
accolades at all. He said, Hall, you have one bad
point here. If you don't improve it, you won't be
around next year. One bad, he didn't say anything
about the good points. No. Later, after he went to
Washington, the Federal Reserve Board, He wrote
me a letter back saying, Dr. Hall, I always knew you
were a good teacher, regardless of what I told you
in my office. Now, in those early years, were there
merit salary increases? No, not regular salary
increases. In fact, the maximum that anybody got,
which usually, unless they were threatening to
leave or had a counter offer to meet. It was about
$200 a year. I got regular, every time there was a
salary increase, I got a salary increase. And the
major increase is when I made associate
professorship. I got $400 increase. Hey, 400 a
year. Yeah. And I think when I made full professor,
I got something like $1,000 increase. All right,
now you arrived as an assistant professor. As an
assistant professor. And you became a full
professor how many years later? In 1954. So in five
years you went. Yeah. It was the year before I, well
I don't have the watch on, but you got one of them.
The first of those were given in 1955, and I made
full professor the year before. And you got one of
them that year or the next year? No, I got one of the
first of the first five ever given. That's what I
thought. Yeah, mine was combination for teaching
and research which they abolished the second year
and became made it split it out into either
research or teaching then they were four given
wait excuse me three given in teaching one in
teaching and research and one in student
relations now when you received yours was it done
as it was with mine a total surprise Oh yeah, I
didn't even know I'd been nominated. Same here.
Gus Watkins later told me that he was instrumental
in making the nomination. He got a number of other
people to support it. No, I didn't know it. In fact,
we were over to, oh, it's abolished now where they
used to hold the faculty meetings. In Guyon Hall.
Guyon Hall, right. And I went over there and I was
just sort of relaxed and listening to the chatter,
you know. trying to get the thing over with so I
could go home after it was late in the afternoon.
And all of a sudden they called my name and I
staggered up there. I actually thought I was never
going to make it up there. My knees were so weak I
could hardly walk up to the podium. I think for all
of us, that was an unforgettable day.
How would you characterize the College of
Agriculture at that point in terms of its
emphasis, its momentum? Well, I have to give Dean
Shepardson and others, his predecessors, a lot of
credit for building up a real fine school of
agriculture. In fact, in those days when I came
here, the reputation of A&M was in agriculture. It
wasn't in engineering, despite what some of the
engineers might want you to think. Engineering
did develop strongly when I was there, but
agriculture and engineering was what A&M stood
for, and it still was in those early days that I was
here. And by and large, the faculty had done their
doctoral degrees all across the nation, hadn't
they? Oh, yeah. They were excellent teachers. I
would hire any number of those early people. Many
of them had offers to go to more prestigious
places, and they stayed because they liked it
here. Where was the department housed? Our
department was housed in several buildings. We
didn't have a central location, but the main
office, the headship or the chairman's, was in the
old Ag Experiment Station, the red building,
which subsequently was destroyed. I was housed.
My office was in Old Science Hall, which also has
been long gone. And a number of others were strung
around. That's where they could find an office for
them. And your classes also were scattered. Oh,
yeah. We didn't have a classroom where we could
call our own, except one small one. We had the
laboratories, but you couldn't hold the lecture
section. In fact, there were large lecture
sections. I taught 200 to 300 students in some of
the lectures. Where were those classes held? They
were held either in the large lecture halls like
chemistry or ag engineering had a big tiered—I
don't know if you remember. I can remember—well,
I won't say what I was going to say. And your
research, how did—what was your beginning
research topic? Well, when I was at the University
of Iowa before I left and at Kentucky, I started to
work on the role of ethylene in plants and in
organisms in general. And I got interrupted
because I was made acting head here in Kentucky. I
came here and The first year I was doing research
just on my own, no sponsorship. I continued some of
the ethylene research that I had started in
Kentucky. But the second year, Dr. Lewis gave me a
25 percent appointment in the Ag Experiment
Station. Of course, that had to have some
practical foundation. So I decided, being that
ethylene was involved in an incision, to do a
project on cotton defoliation. and actually
developed, made it possible for mechanical
harvesting of cotton, not only in Texas, but
elsewhere. And I say in my book without any false
modesty, I think we established the real And you
had not done cotton research before? I hadn't seen
a cotton plant before I came to Texas, no. And about
how long did it take from beginning of that
research to have results that made you proud? Oh, I
was publishing or starting to write up papers from
what I'd done in my graduate work at Kentucky all
along when I was teaching, even at night. And as
soon as I started active research, I was turning
out two and three papers a year at least. And the
cotton project, how? Oh, immediately. You had to
write your results up in what they called progress
reports, which were published and distributed to
the farmers, ranchers. And then how soon did, how
long did it take from the beginning of your
research to the cotton farmer to start
defoliating? Oh, I would say eight to ten years,
something like that. Was there any private
concern, private entrepreneur who became
involved in the, in supporting the research? Oh,
yeah. That was left mostly from research grants
and contracts. That's mostly what my graduate
students and I did the research with. I had the
equivalent of about now would be several million
dollars of sponsored research after about two or
three years after I started there. I got it from the
National Science Foundation, from National
Institutes of Health, from the Cotton industry,
National Cotton Council, headquartered in
Memphis, gave me a large grant. They were all
interested in pushing it, yeah. And it's really,
that's what made the graduate students, their
support came from all these grants. All right, and
then how, when did you become, begin to become a,
here, an administrator?
Well, that was in 19...
I became,
though, a department chairman before that. When
did you chair the department? It was in 1956, I
believe. It's the year that Gus became dean of
agriculture. He insisted on twisting my arm to
become chairman, which I regretted for a while
because I wanted to do teaching and research
entirely. But in 1957, it was announced late there
that even though Dr. Tom Harrington had been both
chancellor and president, that there was a need to
bring in somebody to be president. That was after
Dave Morgan had left in sort of a huff with the
board. In fact, to put it bluntly, they fired him,
although it wasn't announced that way. Let's chat
about him a minute. Now I've heard 99th Hand that he
had some ideas that were kind of similar to to those
that would become realities in the 60s. That is
entirely correct. My book was a man with a lot of
vision and a capable administrator. But he got out
of sync with the people that managed A&M He wanted
to push things too fast. A&M was not responsive in
those days for change. Right. Now, was Dr.
Harrington already? Dr. Harrington, when I first
came here, Dr. Harrington was assistant dean of
arts and sciences, and he was managing the O'Brien
Air Force Base activity where a lot of the former
military people were coming in to go to school. And
then he became dean of arts and sciences. From
there he became dean of the college. He became
president and then chancellor. Was he chancellor
over Morgan? No, he became chancellor after
Gilchrist. So it was Gilchrist and Morgan that
didn't jive as well as they might have. Yeah. No, to
my knowledge, Tom Harrington and Morgan got along
all right, but it was members of the board of
directors we called in those days. They didn't
call them regents or any of it. Was there any
director that you know of who was more potent than
the others in dealing with Morgan? Yeah, I knew
most of them at the time. Pete Peterson from Fort
Worth was on the board at that time. The engineer,
trying to think of his name, there's a building
named after him on the campus. He was from
Beaumont. He had a brother that also served on the
board at one time, a German name. Not Hal Booty? No,
Hal Booty. Because he's Lebanese, he's later. No,
it was
Evans was on the board during those years. Well, it
became not initially when I was here, but later.
And the man from San Antonio, I'm trying to think.
We'll think of those later. All right. So Morgan is
gone. And then Mr. Rudder. is brought over a little
later, in 58 or 9? He was brought over in 58,
although the negotiations apparently happened
in late 57. Do you have any idea of who the people
were and what the process was that identified him.
Yeah. Tony Heldenfels was the man I was trying to
think of from Beaumont, was one of them. Sterling
Evans, Pete Peterson,
Oh, the Boydell, Dr. Boydell. And there were
several other men from Amarillo. Oh, don't get
old. My memory's getting bad. I can't remember
him. Begins with a W, I think. Yeah, if I had my book
here. No, that's all right. It's in that book.
We'll get that later in the second draft. They were
the main ones, I think. Do you have any idea how they
came to identify Rudder? Well, the same way that I
think most of the people in Texas knew him. He was a
famous war hero, and the governor enticed him to
leave his ranch to clean up the land scandal,
rocked land office, which he did magnificently.
And people said, there's a natural leader. And of
course, military-minded people were very much
part of A&M at that time. And they were looking for a
leader. They weren't looking for an academician.
And do you recall your first impression of Mr.
Rutter? Yeah, I was always impressed with Mr.
Rutter. He was a dynamic individual. If you didn't
sit in his presence, you weren't impressed with
him, or at least I was impressed with him. He
admitted to me right from the start that he didn't
know much about academics. He says, that's why I'm
hiring you, Hall. He hired me first as graduate
dean. But I really was dean of the college is what I
was doing. All right. Now, when did that occur?
That was in 1958. 1958. So soon after he got here.
Oh, yeah. He interviewed me. The first thing he did
was hire Dorsey McCrory. as his administrative
assistant. And he sent Dorothy out all around the
campus to find candidates for appoint, because
Boyd Page had left and announced just after Rutter
was appointed that he was going to Iowa State as
vice president, which he did. And he told us in the
inner circle he was leaving several months before
it was made public. But immediately, Rutter
started to look for a replacement. And he sent
Dorsey all around the campus and different places
to get information and so forth. And he called me
in. I had met him previously, and I was still
chairman of the department at the time. And we were
building a new building, the Plant Sciences
Building, and I was having a ball doing it all. And
he called me in, and I thought he wanted to ask me how
the Plant Science Building was coming. All of a
sudden he lowered the boom on me and said, Hall, I
like your research and teaching record. Would you
like to be graduate dean? And he bowed, floored me.
That was the last thing I had in mind. Was that Mr.
Rutter or was that McCrory? That was Mr. Rutter.
Mr. Rutter. Mr. Rutter didn't delegate things
except the nasty things to people that he didn't
want to do. Now where did he office then? In the Koch
building? He was in the Richard Koch building. And
It became the president. He didn't have the
president's suite to start with, but he had it a few
days. All right, so you became graduate dean when?
As I recall, it was 1958, late in 58. No, my
appointment was announced July 58. And the dean of
the college then was whom? And we didn't have a dean
of the college. Boyd Page had been both graduate
dean and dean of the college, and he had left before
I even assumed his office.